Talks to boost EU’s financial ‘bazooka’
Eleventh-hour negotiations have begun to create a much bigger financial “bazooka” to present at this week’s European Union summit that could include running two separate rescue funds and winning increased support for the International Monetary Fund.
This three-pronged rescue system would form part of a crafted package EU leaders hope will win over financial markets, just two months after a similar summit failed to convince bond investors Europe could contain its spiralling debt crisis. The rescue system would be introduced alongside proposals to rewrite EU treaties with far tougher budget rules for the eurozone. According to senior European officials, negotiators are considering allowing the eurozone’s existing €440bn bail-out fund to continue running when a new €500bn facility comes into force in mid-2012, almost doubling the firepower of the bloc’s financial rescue system.
The proposal, being debated by “sherpas” ahead of Thursday’s crucial eurozone summit, could also include speeding up cash payments into the new €500bn fund – known as the European Stability Mechanism – to give it more heft and improve its creditworthiness in the eyes of credit rating agencies.
Supporters of the proposals acknowledge they are controversial and the subject of intense debate by officials negotiating new ESM treaty language. Some northern creditor countries, where bail-out backlash has threatened to topple national governments, have shown reluctance. But the proposals’ backers argue that allowing the ESM to run alongside the current bail-out fund could strengthen Europe’s financial firewall when combined with new eurozone funds for the IMF to increase its capacity to aid struggling countries. The current bail-out fund, known as the European Financial Stability Facility, was originally supposed to wind down when the ESM came into place.
Under the plans being considered, the ESM is unlikely to have its headline €500bn from the start, now envisioned for July. But leveraging up the existing EFSF, which could raise disposable resources to about €600bn, and adding new IMF and ESM resources could create the so-called “bazooka” effect leaders are searching for.
Creating a credible financial firewall has been a key demand by Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank.

Brazilian growth shudders to a halt
Brazil’s economy stalled in the third quarter of this year, demonstrating the vulnerability of the world’s emerging market growth engines to the slowdown in the developed world.
Gross domestic product failed to grow in the three months ended September 30 compared with the previous quarter as weakness in the industrial sector spread to Brazil’s once vibrant consumer.
“Consumption is really slowing down – it’s no longer something that people feared might happen, it’s gradually being realised,” said George Lei, an economist with Nomura in New York.
The sharp deterioration in growth in Brazil poses political challenges for Brazil’s president Dilma Rousseff and comes as China reported last week that manufacturing activity in November contracted for the first time in almost three years.
China, Brazil and India, the three largest emerging economies, are all now slowing, according to their latest GDP figures.
The eurozone crisis is hitting confidence while economic slowdown in Europe and the US is undermining demand both for manufactured goods from emerging markets and for the minerals produced by resource-rich countries such as Brazil.
Other big emerging economies, notably Russia and Indonesia, posted increases in third quarter growth, though even in these economies the authorities see a looming slowdown.
Emerging market growth rates are forecast to remain much higher than in the developed world, with China, for example, predicted to grow at about 8 per cent in 2012. The Asian Development Bank on Tuesday forecast east Asia’s economic growth next year would slightly drop to 7.2 per cent, with a worst case scenario of 5.4 per cent.
But economists are concerned that will not be enough to rescue the world economy.

Clinton seeks closer Burma ties
Hillary Clinton, US secretary of state, vowed to reward tentative reforms by Burma’s authoritarian government and work towards opening a “new chapter” in relations between the two countries.
After meeting Thein Sein, Burma’s president, however, Mrs Clinton yesterday said it was still too soon to lift the tough economic sanctions that have added to the country’s isolation and impoverishment.
Mrs Clinton told Mr Thein Sein Washington was “encouraged” by the steps undertaken in recent months as Burma seeks to emerge from 50 years of repressive military rule. She said the US would support an increase in international aid, a greater role for the World Bank and was considering returning an ambassador to the country.
In talks she described as “candid [and] productive”, Mrs Clinton also urged Mr Thein Sein, a former general, to speed up the release of political prisoners, seek an end to decades of violent conflict with some ethnic groups and cease its dealings with North Korea, which some analysts fear may incorporate an illicit weapons programme.
“The president told me he hopes to build on these steps, and I assured him that these reforms have our support,” Mrs Clinton said after the talks in Burma’s remote capital, Naypyitaw, according to Reuters.
“I also made clear that, while the measures already taken may be unprecedented and welcomed, they are just the beginning.
“We’re not at the point yet where we can consider lifting sanctions that we have in place because of our ongoing concerns about policies that have to be reversed,” Mrs Clinton told reporters, according to Associated Press.
“But any steps that the government takes will be carefully considered and will be matched.”
Mrs Clinton, the most senior US official to visit Burma in more than 50 years, was sent by Barack Obama, US president, to “test the true intentions” of the leadership and deepen bilateral ties in order to balance China’s growing influence in the resource-rich nation of about 60m people.

Nomura dumps eurozone debt
Nomura has reduced its exposure to countries in the eurozone periphery by 75 per cent in the past two months in a move that highlights concerns about the growing risk of holding eurozone periphery government debt amid the region’s crisis.
The Japanese investment bank said it had cut its country exposure to Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain from $3.55bn at the end of September to $884m by last Thursday.
Nomura said it had slashed its exposure to Italy, in particular, by 83 per cent from $2.8bn to $467m.
“We have significantly reduced our GIIPS exposure as part an effort to proactively manage our risk profile during this period of market instability,” the bank said on Monday.
The move comes as Nomura has faced growing concerns about its ability to generate profits after it posted an unexpectedly large Y46.1bn ($591m) loss in the second quarter.
The bank has been placed on review by Moody’s, which warns that its rating could be lowered to just one notch above junk.
The bank has unveiled a $1.2bn cost-cutting exercise in a bid to lower its break-even point and is seeking buyers for non-core business assets.
Nomura is not the only Japanese institution that has slashed its exposure to eurozone periphery countries on concerns about the outlook for the region, as Italian bond yields exceeded 7 per cent. Separately, Kokusai Asset Management, which manages Japan’s largest investment trust, the Global Sovereign fund, said it had sold all its Italian, Spanish and Belgian sovereign bonds.

Technocrat cabinet takes helm in Rome
Italy’s caretaker government of unelected technocrats led by Mario Monti took charge of the eurozone’s third-biggest economy yesterday to the applause of Europe’s leaders and scepticism of investors.
Acknowledging the weight of the eurozone on his shoulders, the 68-year-old economics professor took on the additional responsibility of running the finance ministry in a slimmed-down 17-member cabinet.
He also appointed Corrado Passera, head of Intesa Sanpaolo, Italy’s largest retail bank, as head of a “super ministry” combining industry and infrastructure, reflecting the new government’s emphasis on reforms to lift the stagnating economy. “All this will, I trust, translate into a calming of that part of the market difficulty which concerns our country,” Mr Monti said.
He has already won considerable support from the Italian public and enthusiastic backing from outside Italy.
Angela Merkel – the German chancellor who had a particularly difficult time dealing with Silvio Berlusconi, the departing prime minister – said she valued Mr Monti highly and looked forward to meeting him soon.
“The weeks ahead will be decisive,” French president Nicolas Sarkozy told Mr Monti in a letter. “Together we will succeed. I am convinced that the implementation of new measures on top of those already adopted will restore confidence and allow the return of stability and growth.”
Mr Monti will present his government’s as yet unexplained economic programme to the senate today for a vote of confidence, with the procedure expected to be repeated in the lower house tomorrow.
Even with the arrival of Italy’s new government, yields on its benchmark 10-year bonds remained just above the critical 7 per cent level. The premium Rome pays over Berlin to borrow was at 528 basis points, close to euro-era records. Other eurozone bond markets saw a sell-off but it was milder than Tuesday’s, with French, Spanish and Belgian yields all rising.

Boeing lands record jet order
Boeing on Sunday won its single largest commercial aircraft order when Emirates, the fast-growing Gulf carrier, announced it would buy at least 50 twin-aisle passenger jets from the US manufacturer.
The order for 50 Boeing 777 long-haul aircraft is worth $18bn at list prices, a record contract by value for the company.
Unveiled at the Dubai air show, it provides a much-needed boost for Boeing, which has been badly trailing Airbus – its arch rival – in the number of orders won this year.
The contract also underlines the ambitions of Emirates, the Dubai-based carrier that is rapidly becoming a rival to Asian, European and US airlines.
Emirates has a fleet of 162 aircraft and is already the biggest operator of Boeing’s 777 aircraft and Airbus’s A380 superjumbos.
Jim Albaugh, head of Boeing’s commercial aircraft division, said Boeing’s single largest order by value in its 95-year history was an “extremely proud moment”, adding that the deal would sustain several thousand jobs in the US.
Sheikh Ahmed Bin Saeed Al Maktoum, Emirates’ chief executive, said the 777 order was part of the airline’s strategy to expand across Africa, Asia, Europe and the US.
Emirates is buying 50 Boeing 777-300 ER planes, which seat 365 passengers, and deliveries of the aircraft will start in 2015.
Although the order is worth $18bn at list prices, Emirates is expected to pay significantly less because airlines typically secure discounts on large deals.
Boeing’s previous record single order was a 2006 deal with Air-India for 68 aircraft, worth $11bn at list prices.
Emirates has taken out options on a further 20 Boeing 777-300 ER planes, which means the order’s value could rise to $26bn at list prices.

Man Group recruits top China businesswoman for mainland push
Man Group, the world’s second- largest hedge fund manager, is positioning itself for an expansion into mainland China as part of a drive beyond its base in Europe and the Middle East.
The FTSE 100 listed group, which has suffered over the past quarter from a painful fall in assets under management, due in large part to the eurozone crisis, has hired Yifei Li, one of China’s leading businesswomen, as its “China chair” to oversee the push.
Ms Yifei is the former head of MTV in China and the chief representative in the country of its parent company, Viacom.
Ms Yifei will work with Pierre Lagrange, co-founder of Man-owned GLG Partners, who was made Asia chairman, a new position, by the company last month.
Mr Lagrange has been joined by David Mercurio, a former senior portfolio manager at Singapore’s Government Investment Corporation, the $100bn sovereign wealth fund, who is Man’s new head of Asia Equity.
“We take the view that China is going to be a very big part of growth for the world. It is a perfect time to expand there,” Mr Lagrange told the Financial Times.
The company has a “5-10 year” strategic view, said Mr Lagrange, but sources familiar with Man’s plans say it hopes to open a fully-fledged research and trading office in Beijing in the near future.
However, the company must first be granted licences by Chinese authorities.
“We’re already doing quite a lot of Asian investments,” says Mr Lagrange, “but further down the road we will have Asian-centric equity long short funds and more resources on the ground”.
China is already a “huge source of intelligence” for Man’s funds, Mr Lagrange said. The company has on-the-ground observers monitoring production at factories or consumption in luxury goods outlets, for example.
Asia has become a much less risky place to invest, says Mr Lagrange. “Ten years ago the big determinants of emerging market prices were macro factors and flows,” he says. “It’s reversed. Now those are what dominate investing in Europe.”
Expansion in China remains a desirable but difficult objective for many hedge fund managers, however. While some have established sizeable offices in Hong Kong – including Man, which already has a 60-person operation there – few have ventured on to the mainland.

European banks feel the effects of funding crunch
The funding hole for European banks is deepening following a sharp fall in bond issuance this year as market turmoil leads to a region-wide credit crunch.
European banks have sold $413bn worth of bonds this year, equivalent to just two-thirds of the $654bn that is due to be returned to investors in 2011 as the debts mature, according to data compiled for the Financial Times by Dealogic.
That leaves the banks with a $241bn funding gap in 2011, the first time European lenders have collectively been unable to replace their maturing debt with new bonds for at least the past five years.
Investors say they have been deterred from buying bank bonds due to uncertainty over the financial health of some banks, the fate of the eurozone and the impact of new financial regulation. The funding freeze has raised fears about the knock-on effects for companies reliant on bank funding and the broader economy.
“Some deleveraging after the financial crisis is clearly needed, but I think banks are being sent on a crash diet that will have wider implications,” said Morgan Stanley analyst Huw van Steenis. “It’s not just the risk of a European credit crunch, it will have a knock-on effect in Asia and the US.”
Morgan Stanley estimates that banks will have to dispose of as much as $3,300bn worth of assets over the next few years to meet new regulations on the amount of capital buffers they hold and to address the funding shortfall. The banks’ funding difficulties and shrinking balance sheets are being monitored with mounting concern by the European Central Bank, which is considering a number of new supportive measures. It is worried about the implications for financial stability and the risk of a lending squeeze driving the eurozone deeper into recession.
Banks face an even greater redemption hump next year, when $720bn worth of debt is due to mature.
The Dealogic bank data includes so-called senior unsecured issuance, traditionally the bread and butter of bank funding. It excludes covered bonds, the bundled packages of loans and mortgages that have become increasingly popular for banks to issue.
Including such debt, European banks sold $744bn worth of bonds this year, compared with $888bn worth of maturing debt, still leaving a $144bn shortfall.
With additional reporting by Robin Wigglesworth in London and Ralph Atkins in Frankfurt

Joint ‘eurobonds’ proposed to calm markets
The introduction of a joint “eurobond” that would entirely replace national issuance by individual members of the single currency area could offer the best solution for policymakers seeking a more stable sovereign debt market, according to a study by the European Commission.
The analysis, obtained by the Financial Times ahead of its publication on Wednesday, argues that the creation of commonly backed “stability bonds” would ensure all eurozone members could meet their financing needs and create a vast market that could compete with US treasuries as a global benchmark.
“This approach would be most effective in delivering the benefits of stability bond issuance,” the report says. “The full substitution of stability bond issuance for national issuance would assure full refinancing for all member states irrespective of the condition of their national public finances.”
The complete substitution of national bonds for so-called “eurobonds” is one of three options outlined in the study. The report ackn­ow­ledges that the move would require extensive changes in European Union treaties that could delay its implementation for years.
In addition, such extensive pooling of sovereign debt has been fiercely resisted in Germany, where officials believe it would relieve market pressure on profligate eurozone countries, allowing weak economies to become “free riders” on the strong credit rating of Germany.
Still, senior EU officials believe Germany can be persuaded if the scheme includes strict rules over sovereign spending, and the Commission report includes proposals for vastly expanding Brussels’ authority over national budgets.

China’s aluminium imports predicted to soar by 2020
China will import more than 1m tonnes of aluminium a year by the end of the decade, according to forecasts from CRU, a leading commodities consultancy.
In a report on the long-term outlook for the metal, the consultancy predicted that the appreciation of the renminbi, combined with higher prices for energy, labour and raw materials, would make China’s vast aluminium industry less competitive.
The future role of China in the aluminium market is a subject of heated debate among analysts, traders and producers.
The country is the world’s largest producer and consumer of aluminium, accounting for roughly 40 per cent of the global market of 40m tonnes a year. Until 2007, it was a large net exporter of the metal.
However, since then its aluminium trade has been largely balanced, apart from an opportunistic wave of imports in 2009, with Chinese smelters selling to the domestic manufacturing industry, which is in turn a large exporter of semi-finished aluminium products.
CRU predicted that net Chinese imports of aluminium would rise to 1.4m tonnes in 2020, compared to just 70,000 tonnes last year. “In the next decade we predict China will not be able to keep pace with its demand growth,” the consultancy said. “The task will then fall to producers in the world ex-China to meet the supply shortfall.”
The prediction, while bullish for non-Chinese aluminium producers such as Rusal, Alcoa, and Rio Tinto, is more conservative than some other forecasts. CRU predicts that net imports will remain small, below 200,000 tonnes, until 2015.
Some analysts and producers believe large Chinese imports could come much sooner, as the country’s aluminium smelters, some of which count as the highest cost producers in the industry, are forced out of business by rising power prices. Inventories of the metal at Shanghai Futures Exchange warehouses have fallen sharply, to their lowest since February 2008.
On Monday, Rusal, the world’s top producer of aluminium, said that 10-15 per cent of global output would be mothballed in the first half of next year if prices were to remain at current levels.
Chinese imports could support prices, traders say, although the impact is likely to be counterbalanced by large stockpiles of the metal in the west.

US denies blocking climate talks
The US rejected claims it was obstructing a new global agreement to curb greenhouse gas emissions and said it supported European Union calls for a “road map” to a new climate deal.
In comments EU ministers seized on to claim Washington was starting to back their demands in the final hours of talks, Todd Stern, the US’s top official at the UN climate talks, appeared to go as far as suggesting Washington now backed the EU road-map plan, the boldest offer on the table at the conference.
“The EU has called for a road map. We support that,” Mr Stern told reporters at a hastily convened news conference called shortly after he was heckled by an activist accusing the US of blocking the talks.
“Whether it ends up being legally binding or not, we don’t know yet, but we are strongly committed to promptly starting a process to move forward on that,” he said, adding it was “nonsense” to suggest Washington was trying to delay action in Durban.
But in a sign of the difficult path the US Democratic administration is treading as it tries to avoid providing Republicans with ammunition ahead of next year’s presidential election, while also not being blamed for wrecking the talks, Mr Stern’s office later sought to clarify his remarks.
“Todd Stern said in his press conference today that the US could support a process to negotiate a new climate accord,” a spokeswoman said. “He did not say that the US supports a legally binding agreement as the result of that process. The EU has supported both a process and the result being a legally binding agreement.”
The Durban conference began with low expectations that any meaningful new climate deal could be agreed, even though it comes just one year before the expiry of the main provisions of the Kyoto protocol, the world’s only treaty obliging countries to cut their carbon emissions.
The EU says it will sign up for a new round of binding targets under the Kyoto treaty, but only on condition that countries not bound by that pact, such as the US and China, agree to start negotiating a second, comprehensive and legally binding deal. It wants the deal negotiated by 2015 and entering into force no later than 2020.
Ministers from the EU said a clear majority of countries now backed their plan, including Brazil, which had previously held its cards close to its chest.
Peter Kent, Canada’s environment minister, said “2015 would be a reasonable target to set to pull together any new climate change regime”.
Chris Huhne, the UK’s climate secretary, said more than 120 of the 190-plus countries in Durban backed the EU. “I think the US is reflecting the pressure that has been brought to bear,” he said. “It may all go pear-shaped; it isn’t a done deal. But we are making progress.”
China and the US, the world’s first and second biggest carbon emitters respectively, have kept the talks deadlocked for years as each baulks at making a move before the other.
China suggested it was ready to consider a legally binding deal earlier in the week, but both the US and the EU said it was not clear if Beijing thought it should be bound itself.

Eurozone fears rise over Italy
Italian bond yields on Wednesday saw their biggest one-day rise since the launch of the euro amid fears that investors had lost confidence in the world’s third-biggest debt market.
In a sharp worsening of the eurozone crisis, Italian 10-year bond yields rose nearly three-quarters of a point to 7.48 per cent – a level considered unsustainable by many economists.
The Italian bond sell-off, which sparked a fall in the euro, European equities and bank stocks, was triggered by a move by clearing houses to increase the cost of margin payments for trading the country’s bonds.
The markets were also hit by worries that Rome would not drive through necessary economic reforms swiftly given the uncertainty following Silvio Berlusconi’s announcement on Tuesday night that he would step down as prime minister.
Traders said that intervention by the European Central Bank stemmed the rise in Italian yields.
The central bank was reported to be buying small amounts of bonds to settle the markets. However, Italian 10-year yields remained well above 7 per cent, prompting some investors to suggest that the market had lost confidence in Italy’s ability to tackle the debt crisis.
John Stopford, head of fixed income at Investec, said: “We have seen huge movements in Italian yields, taking us to levels that look unsustainable. We are at or approaching a tipping point in this crisis.”
The intense market pressure appears to have focused minds in Rome, with politicians across the spectrum agreeing to pass emergency economic reforms through parliament within days, possibly by Saturday, to be followed by the prime minister’s immediate resignation.
Giorgio Napolitano, head of state, said that market fears that Italy would be paralysed for a prolonged period were groundless. He is working to find parliamentary consensus for the formation of an interim government led by technocrats. Failing that, he said that he would dissolve parliament and call early elections, the route favoured by Mr Berlusconi.
However, the biggest worry for some is contagion spreading to France, which saw its premium over Germany to borrow in the markets jump to fresh euro-era highs.
One economist said: “France is the next country to watch. If French spreads and yields start rising in a similar way to Italy, then that really would be the tipping point for this crisis and potentially the end of the euro. The ECB may at that point have to buy government bonds in much bigger size.”

Fed predicts low inflation to 2014
The US Federal Reserve has predicted that inflation will remain low in 2014, providing a clear signal that it is likely to ease policy further.
Most Fed officials forecast inflation will sit at between 1.5 and 2 per cent over the next three years. That compares with the central bank’s unofficial goal of “2 per cent or a bit below” and would provide room for it to ease monetary policy.
While further easing could involve a third round of quantitative easing – or QE3 – the Fed made no change to its monetary policy on Wednesday.
It noted that “economic growth strengthened somewhat in the third quarter” but cautioned that “recent indicators point to continued weakness in labour market conditions” and cited “significant downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets”.
Charles Evans, president of the Chicago Fed, expressed his dissent with the decision, arguing in favour of immediate ­easing.
Mr Evans’ opposition highlights the desire of some Fed officials to do more to support the economy. “You don’t dissent unless you feel like you represent more than one person,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial.
The open market committee reiterated its earlier forecast that it would keep interest rates on hold “at least through mid-2013” and continue its campaign to drive down longer-term interest rates.
It said it expected inflation to “settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the committee’s dual mandate”.

First gain for iron ore in seven weeks
Spot iron ore prices rose on Monday for the first time in more than seven weeks as buyers returned to the market after a precipitous drop in the commodity, a key ingredient in steelmaking.
The gain puts an end to a 36 per cent decline in iron ore prices since early September. Chinese steelmakers, who account for 60 per cent of the internationally-traded market, had halted their purchases of iron ore in the spot market amid concerns about an economic slowdown.
But traders and analysts said the sharp plunge in prices appeared overdone, especially as sentiment towards industrial commodities more generally had improved last week, with copper rallying 14.4 per cent. “On the physical side there is some genuine weakness but it’s much overstated,” said Ric Deverell, head of commodities research at Credit Suisse.
Benchmark iron ore prices delivered to China on Monday rose to $118.75 a tonne for material with a 62 per cent iron content, according to Platts, the pricing agency. That was up 2.2 per cent from $116.25 on Friday, the lowest in more than a year.
Derivatives linked to the average price of iron ore for 2012 have rebounded sharply, from a low of $116 a tonne on Thursday to slightly more than $130 on Monday, brokers said.
Analysts at Macquarie, the Australian bank, noted that data on iron ore inventories at small Chinese steel mills indicated a period of rapid destocking since September. “Mills have clearly been buying less iron ore than has been used in steel production and, although it does not mean iron ore prices are set to bounce back immediately, it does indicate that risks are now strongly skewed to the upside,” the bank said.

France pledges to defend triple A rating
France admitted on Tuesday its growth projection for 2012 was “probably too high” but pledged to take all necessary measures to preserve its triple-A sovereign debt rating, following a warning from Moody’s, the US credit rating agency, of a possible cut in its outlook to negative from stable.
The extra cost France has to pay over Germany to borrow rose to a 21-year high after the Moody’s note, with 10-year yields over Germany jumping to 103 basis points – the highest level since November 1990 – and the yield on its 10-year debt moved to 3.08 per cent.
Shares in French banks, which are heavily exposed to sovereign debt, fell sharply on the news. BNP Paribas was down 6.5 per cent in morning trading, with Société Générale off 6 per cent and Crédit Agricole down 5 per cent.
François Baroin, finance minister, told France 2 television that the centre-right government’s projection of a 1.75 per cent increase in gross domestic product for 2012 was “probably too high”. The growth level is critical to France meeting its target of reducing its budget deficit to 3 per cent of GDP by 2013 and thus controlling its public debt, which is set to exceed 87 per cent of GDP next year.
Moody’s pointed out that French government debt metrics “are now among the weakest of France’s triple-A peers”.
Mr Baroin said it was “indisputable” that the government would have to adapt the growth figure, but said its budget projections would not need adjusting if growth was between 1.5 per cent and 1.75 per cent. Consensus private sector projections expect a figure of 1 per cent.
“We will conserve the triple A [rating],” Mr Baroin said. “It is a necessary condition to protect our social model. We will do everything to avoid a downgrade.”
Gary Jenkins, head of fixed income at Evolution Securities, said: “If the economic data disappoint, then France may well be downgraded by mid-2012, although at the moment Moody’s is looking at the outlook rather than considering a rating downgrade.”

BlackBerry woes hit half of subscribers
Research In Motion, the maker of BlackBerry smartphones, was battling to shore up its network on Wednesday as it emerged that an intermittent service outage preventing users accessing email had spread to 30m-40m people, half of all subscribers worldwide.
The three-day-old technical problems, which began at a datacentre in Slough outside London, were affecting users in the Americas, Europe, India, the Middle East and Africa – the biggest network failure to hit the Canadian company since it launched the BlackBerry service a decade ago.
Together with RIM’s slow and limited public response, the problems have outraged users who have had patchy or no BlackBerry email or messaging services since Monday morning. The incident has also raised questions about RIM’s oft-touted 99.999 per cent network reliability rating and could encourage both business customers and consumers to look elsewhere.
The outage, initially thought to affect mainly consumers, has begun to hit corporate users. Mimecast, an email service company that works with big UK law firms, said about
10 per cent of its corporate clients had reported problems with their BlackBerry service.
Analysts said the network problems could derail RIM’s attempt to fight back against intense competition from rival smartphone manufacturers, including Apple – which will begin to sell its new iPhone 4GS on Friday – and handset makers using Google’s Android operating system.
“It’s a blow upon a bruise. It comes at a bad time,” said Richard Windsor, global technology specialist at Nomura. Some analysts also suggested the prolonged outage could result in claims for compensation from telecoms network operators who pay RIM for its data services.
Unlike other smartphone makers, RIM operates its own data network including three network operations centres for its wireless email system: the one in Slough and two in Waterloo, Ontario. All BlackBerry data traffic passes through one of these centres.
